 A transitive topological groupoid with smooth base, first-countable arrow space and
 manifold source fibers and isotropy groups has a unique compatible Lie groupoid up
                     to a base-preserving continuous isomorphism
Stable ID: 1773
Authors: Pawel Razny
Original work: The Solution of Hilbert’s Fifth Problem for Transitive Groupoids
Version: Oﬀicial SIGMA 14 (2018) article 070, DOI 10.3842/SIGMA.2018.070; journal PDF and native
TeX acquired 2026-10-01, exact bytes pinned by SHA256
Selected task scope: Full Theorem3.6 for a transitive topological groupoid G with smooth base G0,
first-countable arrow space G1, and topological-manifold source fiber G_x and isotropy group G_x^x
(equivalently all fibers/isotropy groups by transitivity). The conclusion is a continuously isomorphic
compatible Lie groupoid unique through base-preserving isomorphism as in the source. The quotient
property of t_x is proved, not an extra hypothesis. Standard Hausdorff/second-countable manifold
conventions used in the dimension proof are retained. No weakening to a merely topological base,
arbitrary non-manifold isotropy or nontransitive groupoid is asserted.
Diﬀiculty: H2: Smoothness of the base and local Euclidean isotropy do not by themselves give the
missing quotient-map hypothesis for a groupoid. The author controls the source-fiber orbit space through
Cartan principal bundles, covering dimension and local product neighborhoods. The invariance-of-
domain argument establishes the crucial local Euclidean structure and target quotient property before
the established smoothing theorem can apply.
Editorial boundary note (not author text): The full original main Theorem 3.6 and complete
author local quotient-map proof are retained, together with all topological/groupoid/Cartan-
bundle context and the two new dimension/product lemmas. The source-fiber orbit-space separa-
tion/compactness/metric dimension, relatively compact neighborhood comparison and invariance-
of-domain argument establish local Euclidean structure and the target quotient property. Prior
Lie-groupoid smoothing/uniqueness is explicitly credited background Theorem 1.1. The theorem is
author-positioned as the main removal of its formerly extra quotient-map assumption, with the complete
new core bundled into one unit. Source Hausdorff/second-countable manifold conventions are included;
Gleason–Yamabe variants are not counted.
Source: https://sigma-journal.com/2018/070/ DOI: https://doi.org/10.3842/SIGMA.2018.0
70
License and attribution: Copyright retained by the named authors. Published by SIGMA under CC
BY 4.0: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Source: https://sigma-journal.com
/about.html. Adaptation consists of standalone excerpt formatting, cover and numbering restoration;
original author language and mathematical text are retained.

Author text begins below.


1 Introduction
In this short paper we refine the generalization of Hilbert’s fifth problem (which states that a locally
Euclidean topological group is isomorphic as a topological group to a Lie group and was famously solved
in [4] and [7]) to the case of transitive groupoids. The main results of our paper [10] gave a partial
solution to this problem via the following results:

Theorem 1.1. Let G be a transitive topological groupoid with a smooth base G0 , Tychonoff source fibers
Gx and first countable space of morphisms G1 for which the topological groups Gxx are locally Euclidean and
the map tx is a quotient map (or equivalently has the sequence covering property). Then G is continuously
isomorphic to a unique Lie groupoid through a base preserving isomorphism.

Theorem 1.2. Let G be a transitive topological groupoid with a smooth base G0 for which the spaces Gxx ,
G1 and Gx are topological manifolds and the map tx is a quotient map (or equivalently has the sequence
covering property). Then G is continuously isomorphic to a unique Lie groupoid through a base preserving
isomorphism.

                                                    1
   Using these results we were able to solve the problem for proper transitive groupoids:

Theorem 1.3. Let G be a proper transitive topological groupoid with a smooth base G0 , for which the
spaces Gxx , Gx and G1 are topological manifolds. Then G is continuously isomorphic to a unique Lie
groupoid through a base preserving isomorphism.

    In this paper we provide the solution of the general case by dropping the assumption “tx is a quotient
map” in Theorem 1.2 (as it turns out it follows from other assumptions in Theorem 1.2) and in doing
so obtain Theorem 3.6 which is the main result of this paper. We also present some versions of the
Gleason–Yamabe theorem for transitive groupoids. Throughout the paper we assume manifolds to be
second-countable and Haudorff (in particular they are metrizable).


2 Preliminaries
2.1 Some topology
In order to make this short paper as self-contained as possible we recall some basic topological notions
and properties which are used in subsequent sections. We begin with some well known properties of
quotient maps (identifications). A continuous surjective map p : X → Y is a quotient map if a subset U
of Y is open in Y if and only if p−1 (U ) is open in X. Equivalently, Y is the quotient space of X with
respect to the relation ∼ given by x ∼ y if and only if there exists a point z ∈ Y such that x, y ∈ p−1 (z).
Quotient maps are characterized by the following universal property:

Proposition 2.1. Given a quotient map p : X → Y and another continuous map f : X → Z which is
constant on the fibers of p there is a unique continuous map f : Y → Z such that the following diagram
commutes:
                                                     f
                                               X         Z
                                                      p
                                                          f

                                                          Y.
   We also recall the following result which will be useful in the proof of the main theorem:

Theorem 2.2 ([9, Corollary 5]). Let f : M → N be a continuous bijection between topological manifolds.
Then dim(M ) = dim(N ) and f is a homeomorphism.

   Furthermore, we note some facts about the dimension of a separable metric space from [3].

Definition 2.3. Let X be a set and U a family of subsets of X. By the order of the family U we mean
the largest integer n such that the family U contains n + 1 sets with a non-empty intersection, if no such
integer exists, we say that the family U has order ∞.

Definition 2.4. To a separable metric space X one assigns the dimension of X, denoted by dim(X)
defined by the following conditions:

  1) dim(X) ≤ n, where n ∈ N if every finite open cover of the space X has a finite open refinement of
     order ≤ n,
  2) dim(X) = n if dim(X) ≤ n and it is not true that dim(X) ≤ n − 1,
  3) dim(X) = ∞ if dim(X) ≥ n for any n ∈ N

We also put dimx (X) = inf{dim(U ) | U neighbourhood of x}.

Remark 2.5. The invariant defined above is called the covering dimension of X. We recall that, in the
separable metric case all three definitions of dimension (small inductive, large inductive and covering;
see [3]) coincide by [3, Theorem 1.7.7]. Hence, we simply call this invariant the dimension of X and
restate the theorems from [3] in a manner suitable to this convention.

Theorem 2.6 ([3, Theorem 1.1.2]). If X is a separable metric space and A ⊂ X is a subspace then
dim(A) ≤ dim(X).

                                                     2
Theorem 2.7 ([3, Theorem 1.5.3]). If a separable metric space X can be represented as the union of a
sequence {F1 , F2 , , . . . } of closed subspaces such that dim Fi ≤ n for i ∈ N then dim(X) ≤ n.

   It is also well known that the dimension of a manifold is equal to its dimension as a separable metric
space and hence no ambiguity can arise (this is actually a consequence of the previous two theorems and
the fact that dim(Rn ) = n; see [3, Theorem 1.8.2] for the latter).
   In the final section of this paper we will be using the following important theorem:

Theorem 2.8 (Gleason–Yamabe theorem for compact groups). Let G be a compact Hausdorff topological
group. For every neighbourhood U of the identity of G there exists a compact normal subgroup K contained
in U such that G/K is isomorphic as a topological group to a Lie group.

   The proof of this theorem can be found, e.g., in [12, Theorem 1.4.14].

2.2 Groupoids
We give a brief recollection of some basic notions concerning groupoids. Let us start by giving the
definition:

Definition 2.9. A groupoid G is a small category in which all the morphisms are isomorphisms. Let us
denote by G0 the set of objects of this category (also called the base of G) and by G1 the set of morphisms
of this category. This implies the existence of the following five structure maps:

  1) the source map s : G1 → G0 which associates to each morphism its source;
  2) the target map t : G1 → G0 which associates to each morphism its target;
  3) the identity map Id : G0 → G1 which associates to each object the identity over that object;
  4) the inverse map i : G1 → G1 which associates to each morphism its inverse;
  5) the multiplication (composition) map ◦ : G2 → G1 which associates to each composable pair of
     morphisms its composition (G2 is the set of composable pairs).

A groupoid endowed with topologies on G1 and G0 which make all the structure maps continuous is called
a topological groupoid. If additionally G0 and G1 are smooth manifolds, the source map is a surjective
submersion and all the structure maps are smooth, then the topological groupoid is called a Lie groupoid.

Remark 2.10. Note that the identity map and the target map restricted to the image of the identity
map are inverse to each other and so the identity map is an embedding. Hence, we can identify G0 with
the image of the identity structure map.

   We denote by Gx the fibers of the source map (source fibers) and by G x the fibers of the target
map (target fibers). We also denote by Gxy the set of morphisms with source x and target y. For a Lie
groupoid Gx , G x and Gxy are all closed embedded submanifolds of G1 . What is more Gxx are Lie Groups.
We also denote the image of G0 through the identity structure map by IdG .

Definition 2.11. A morphism of groupoids is a pair (F, f ) : G → H where F : G1 → H1 and f : G0 → H0
are functions which commute with the structure maps. If in addition G and H are topological (resp.
Lie) groupoids and both F and f are continuous (resp. smooth) then (F, f ) is called a continuous (resp.
smooth) morphism. If both F and f are bijections (resp. homeomorphisms, diffeomorphisms) then (F, f )
is an isomorphism (resp. continuous isomorphism, smooth isomorphism) of groupoids. Furthermore, if f
is the identity on G0 then the morphism (F, f ) is called a base preserving morphism.

   Throughout this paper we are going to use several special classes of groupoids:

Definition 2.12. A groupoid G is said to be transitive if for each pair of points x, y ∈ G0 there exists
a morphism with source x and target y. Conversely, if all the morphisms of G are automorphisms (i.e.,
s(g) = t(g) for all g ∈ G) we say that G is totally intransitive. A topological groupoid is said to be proper
if the map (s, t) : G1 → G0 × G0 is proper.

Definition 2.13. A topological groupoid is principal if:

                                                     3
  1) the restriction of the target map to any source fiber is a quotient map (we write tx for the restriction
     of the target map to the source fiber over x ∈ G0 );
  2) for each x ∈ G0 the division map δx : Gx × Gx → G1 defined by the formula δx (g, h) = g ◦ h−1 is a
     quotient map.
Remark 2.14. This notion is more commonly used in a different sense (see, e.g., [11]). The above
definition (used, e.g., in [5]) is convenient to the study of transitive topological groupoids whilst in the
Lie case it is equivalent to local triviality of a transitive groupoid. However, the terminology of locally
trivial Lie groupoids is itself rarely used due to a result of Pradines stating that every transitive Lie
groupoid over a connected base is locally trivial.
Example 2.15. Let G be a topological (resp. Lie) group and let M be a topological space (resp. smooth
manifold). M × G × M is a topological (resp. Lie) groupoid over M with source and target maps given
by projections onto the first and third factor and composition law given by the formula

                                      (x, g, y) ◦ (y, h, z) = (x, gh, z).

Groupoids of this form are called trivial groupoids. If G is the trivial group then the above groupoid is
called the pair groupoid of M . Such groupoids are principal topological groupoids.
   More examples of principal groupoids can be easily provided by the gauge groupoid construction
presented in the subsequent section.
Proposition 2.16 ([5, Proposition 3.2]). A transitive groupoid G is isomorphic (not in a continuous
manner) to the trivial groupoid G0 × Gxx × G0 .
Remark 2.17. It is worth noting that for a transitive topological groupoid G and a given source fiber
Gx composition with h : x → y gives a homeomorphism h̃ : Gy → Gx since it has an inverse (composition
with h−1 ) and conjugation by h (hgh−1 for g ∈ Gxx ) gives a continuous isomorphism of topological
groups h∗ : Gxx → Gyy since it has an inverse (conjugation by h−1 ). Hence, we write “Gx (resp. Gxx )
has property P ” as shorthand for “Gx (resp. Gxx ) has property P for some x ∈ G0 and equivalently for
any x ∈ G0 ” whenever this remark can be applied. Moreover, since ty (h̃) = tx and δy (h̃, h̃) = δx we
write “tx (resp. δx ) has property P ” as shorthand for “tx (resp. δx ) has property P for some x ∈ G0 and
equivalently for any x ∈ G0 ” whenever this remark can be applied.
   We are going to use the following theorem concerning groupoid morphisms with principal source:
Theorem 2.18 ([5, Proposition 1.21]). Let G be a principal topological groupoid and G ′ be any topological
groupoid. Additionally, let (ϕ, f ) : G → G ′ be a morphism of groupoids (not necessarily continuous). If
there is an x ∈ G0 such that ϕx : Gx → Gf′ (x) is continuous then (ϕ, f ) is continuous.
   The final notions we need to introduce here are subgroupoids and quotient groupoids:
Definition 2.19. A subgroupoid of G is a pair of subset G1′ ⊂ G1 and G0′ ⊂ G0 , such that s(G1′ ) ⊂ G0′ ,
t(G1′ ) ⊂ G0′ , Id(G0′ ) ⊂ G1′ and G1′ is closed under the composition and inversion structure maps. A
subgroupoid G ′ of G is called wide if G0′ = G0 . A subgroupoid N of G is said to be normal if it is wide
and for any g ∈ N1 and any h ∈ G1 satisfying s(h) = s(g) = t(g) we have hgh−1 ∈ N1 .
   To introduce the notion of a quotient topological groupoid we first need do specify the underlying
groupoid structure on the appropriate quotient space. Since in this paper we are only interested in
quotients by totally intransitive groupoids, we provide an appropriately restricted definition (see [5] for
a more general discussion of this topic).
Definition 2.20. Let N be a totally intransitive normal subgroupoid of the groupoid G. Define an
equivalence relation ∼ on G1 by g ∼ h if and only if there exists n1 , n2 ∈ N such that n1 gn2 = h. We
then define the quotient groupoid as G/N := (G1 / ∼, G0 ) with the structure maps induced from G.
Example 2.21. Simplest examples of normal subgroupoids and quotient groupoids are provided by
 ∪ trivial groupoids. A normal subgroupoid N of a trivial groupoid G = M × G × M is of the form
the
    {x} × N × {x} for some normal subgroup N of G whilst the quotient G/N is simply M × (G/N ) × M .
x∈M


                                                      4
    It was proven in [2] that if G is a topological groupoid then G/N can be endowed with a unique
topology such that it makes G/N into a topological groupoid, the projection π : G → G/N is continuous
and for every continuous morphism of topological groupoids (ϕ, f ) : G → G ′ such that ϕ(N ) ⊂ IdG ′ there
is a unique continuous morphism (ϕ, f ) : G/N → G ′ satisfying ϕ ◦ π = ϕ (the last condition is called the
universal property of topological quotient groupoids). From now on quotient groupoids of a topological
groupoid will be considered with this topology. It is important to note that this topology need not
coincide with the quotient topology of G1 / ∼ (cf. [5]). This will give rise to minor diﬀiculties when
proving the Gleason–Yamabe theorem for transitive groupoids.
    We conclude this section by recalling an important technical result from [10] which also finds a use
in the current paper:

Proposition 2.22. Let G be a transitive topological groupoid with G1 first countable. Then the following
conditions are equivalent:

  1) tx is a quotient map;
  2) tx is open;
  3) δx is a quotient map;
  4) δx is open.

Furthermore, if (s, t) : G1 → G0 × G0 is a quotient map, then the above properties hold.

2.3 Cartan principal bundles
In this section we give a brief recollection of principal bundles, Cartan principal bundles, how they relate
to each other as well as some results from [8] which are of key importance to the present paper. A more
detailed exposition of this subject can be found in [5] and [8].

Definition 2.23. A Cartan principal bundle is a quadruple (P, B, G, π), where P and B are topological
spaces, G is a topological group acting freely on P and π : P → B is a surjective continuous map, with
the following properties:

  1) π is a quotient map with fibers coinciding with the orbits of the action of G on P ,
  2) the division map δ : Pπ → G with domain Pπ := {(u, v) ∈ P × P | π(u) = π(v)} defined by the
     property δ(ug, u) = g is continuous.

   We are also going to need a notion of morphism between such bundles:

Definition 2.24. A morphism of Cartan principal bundles is a triple

                                 (F, f, ϕ) : (P, B, G, π) → (P ′ , B ′ , G′ , π ′ ),

where F : P → P ′ and f : B → B ′ are continuous functions and ϕ : G → G′ is a continuous morphism of
topological groups such that

                                  π ′ ◦ F = f ◦ π,           F (pg) = F (p)ϕ(g)

for p ∈ P and g ∈ G. A morphism of Cartan principal bundles is said to be base preserving if f is the
identity on B.

Definition 2.25. A Cartan principal bundle (P, B, G, π) is called proper if the action of G on P is
proper.

   A better known and stronger notion is the following:

Definition 2.26. A principal bundle is a quadruple (P, B, G, π), where P and B are topological spaces,
G is a topological group acting freely on P and π : P → B is a surjective continuous map, with the
following properties:

  1) the fibers of π coincide with the orbits of the action of G;

                                                         5
  2) (local triviality) there is an open covering Ui of B and continuous maps σi : Ui → P such that
     π ◦ σi = IdUi .

A principal bundle is said to be smooth if P and B are smooth manifolds, G is a Lie group, and the
action, projection and σi are smooth maps.

    We are now going to present important constructions from [5] and [6] which relate the notion of Cartan
principal bundles to principal groupoids. Given a principal groupoid G the quadruple (Gx , G0 , Gxx , tx )
constitutes a Cartan principal bundle for any point x ∈ G0 (this is called the vertex bundle of G at
x). It is easy to see that given a morphism of groupoids (F, f ) : G → G ′ the restriction of the map F
to Gx gives a morphism of bundles F |Gx : Gx → Gf (x) . It is also worth noting that even though this
construction is dependent on the choice of x all the vertex bundles are continuously isomorphic by use
of translations (cf. [5]). In the other direction given a Cartan principal bundle (P, B, G, π) there exists a
structure of a topological groupoid over B on (P ×P )/G (this is called the gauge groupoid of (P, B, G, π)).
Furthermore, a morphism of Cartan principal bundles

                                 (F, f, ϕ) : (P, B, G, π) → (P ′ , B ′ , G′ , π ′ )

induces a morphism of gauge groupoids F ∗ defined by F ∗ ([(u, v)]) = [F (u), F (v)]. It is apparent from
the form of the induced morphisms that a base preserving morphism of Cartan principal bundles induces
a base preserving morphism of the corresponding gauge groupoids and that a base preserving morphism
of principal groupoids induces a base preserving morphism of vertex bundles. We give the following
theorem which was proven in [5]:

Theorem 2.27. The constructions above are mutually inverse (up to a continuous base preserving
isomorphism) and give a one to one correspondence between continuous isomorphism classes of Cartan
principal bundles and continuous isomorphism classes of principal groupoids.

   We also need the following important results from [8]:

Theorem 2.28 ([8, Proposition 1.2.5]). A Cartan principal bundle (P, B, G, π) with P and B Tychonoff
is proper.

Theorem 2.29 ([8, Section 4.1]). A Cartan principal bundle (P, B, G, π) with G a Lie group and P
Tychonoff is locally trivial.

Theorem 2.30 ([8, Proposition 1.3.2]). Given a proper Cartan principal bundle (P, B, G, π) with P
Tychonoff and a normal closed subgroup N of G, (P /N, B, G/N, π) is also a proper Cartan principal
bundle with P /N Tychonoff.

Theorem 2.31 ([8, Theorem 4.3.4]). A proper Cartan principal bundle (P, B, G, π) with G a Lie group
and P separable and metrizable admits an invariant metric. Hence, P /G is metrizable. Moreover,
dim[x] (P /G) = dimx (P ) − dim(G).


3 Hilbert’s fifth problem for transitive groupoids
3.1 Some preliminary theorems
This part is devoted to establishing two theorems which are crucial to the solution to Hilberts fifth
problem for groupoids given in the next subsection. We feel that the results of this section should be
known, however we were unable to find a suitable reference and so we provide their proofs for the readers
convenience.

Theorem 3.1. Let f : M1 → M2 be a continuous bijection between separable metric spaces. Additionally
let M1 be locally compact of dimension m. Then dim(M2 ) = m.

Proof. We first prove dim(M2 ) ≤ m. Let us take around each point x ∈ M1 its relatively compact
open neighbourhood Ux . Since a separable metric space is Lindelöf we can choose a countable subcover
{Ui }i∈I from {Ux }x∈M1 . Now f |Ui : Ui → f (Ui ) is a homeomorphism since for i ∈ I the set Ui is compact.

                                                         6
Moreover, this implies that f (Ui ) are closed in M2 of dimension at most m (since homeomorphisms
preserve dimension and dim(Ui ) ≤ m due to the fact that they are subspaces of an m dimensional space).
Hence the family f (Ui ) satisfy the conditions of Theorem 2.7 which implies that M2 has dimension no
greater than m. On the other hand at least one of Ui has to have dimension m since otherwise by
Theorem 2.7 we have m = dim(M1 ) ≤ m − 1. Hence, at least one of f (Ui ) is of dimension m which
implies that dim(M2 ) ≥ m.

Theorem 3.2. Let S ⊂ Rm be such that for some open V ⊂ Rn the set V × S is homeomorphic to an
(n + m)-dimensional manifold. Then S is open in Rm .

Proof. Let us assume that S is not open in Rm . Then there exists a point x ∈ S such that no neigh-
bourhood of x is contained in S. Let us take a neighbourhood U(x,y) of (x, y) for some y ∈ V which is
homeomorphic to an open ball and let us denote by i : S × V → Rm × Rn the inclusion given by the inclu-
sions of S into Rm and V into Rn . Then by the invariance of domain theorem i(U(x,y) ) ⊂ S×V ⊂ Rm ×Rn
is open in Rm × Rn . But this cannot be the case as it contains the point (x, y) and it cannot contain any
neighbourhood of (x, y) from the product basis of Rm × Rn (since then S would contain the projection
of that set onto Rm which would be an open neighbourhood of x).

Remark 3.3. We would like to note that even though this result seems natural and is somewhat expected
it is not trivial since there exists more than one topological space X such that X × R is homeomorphic
to R4 (cf. [1], where it is shown that X doesn’t even have to be a manifold).

Corollary 3.4. There is no S ⊂ Rk such that for some open V ⊂ Rn the set V × S is homeomorphic
to an (n + m)-dimensional manifold for some m > k.

Proof. We apply the previous theorem to the set {0}m−k × S ⊂ Rm and note that this set cannot be
open in Rm .

3.2 The solution to Hilbert’s fifth problem for transitive groupoids
Let us state our main theorem:

Theorem 3.5. Let G be a transitive topological groupoid such that G0 is a smooth manifold, Gx and Gxx
are topological manifolds. Then the map tx is a quotient map.

Proof. To prove this let us consider the following diagram:
                                                     tx
                                              Gx             G0
                                                      π
                                                            tx

                                                           Gx /Gxx .

Note that since the fibres of π and tx coincide, tx is a bijection. We shall prove that Gx /Gxx is a topological
manifold and this by Theorem 2.2 will imply that tx is a homeomorphism which in turn implies that tx is
a quotient map. First of all we observe that Gx /Gxx is Hausdorff (given two points y, z ∈ Gx /Gxx they can
be separated by the inverse images through tx of the open sets separating tx (y) and tx (z)). Furthermore,
Gx /Gxx is locally compact since given a point y ∈ Gx /Gxx the image of a compact neighbourhood of some
point in π −1 (y) is a compact neighbourhood of y (we use here the fact that π as a projection onto the
orbit space of a group action is open). Local compactness and being Hausdorff imply that Gx /Gxx is
Tychonoff. We also note that Gx /Gxx is second countable (the countable basis is given by the images
of some countable basis of Gx through π). The group Gxx under our assumptions is a Lie group due
to the solution to the classical Hilberts fifth problem. It is also apparent that (Gx , Gx /Gxx , Gxx , π) is a
Cartan principal bundle (since π is a quotient map and δ(g, h) = h−1 g must be continuous since G1 is
a topological groupoid). Hence, by Theorems 2.29 and 2.28 this bundle is proper and locally trivial.
Theorem 2.31 implies that Gx /Gxx is metrizable with dim(Gx /Gxx ) = dim(Gx ) − dim(Gxx ) which in turn
implies that dim(G0 ) = dim(Gx ) − dim(Gxx ) (by Theorem 3.1 and the fact that a second countable metric
space is separable).


                                                       7
    We will now show that Gx /Gxx is locally Euclidean. Let us fix a point y ∈ Gx /Gxx along with its open
neighbourhood S such that the bundle (Gx , Gx /Gxx , Gxx , π) is trivial when restricted to S. Using local
compactness we can assume without loss of generality that S is relatively compact. This allows us to
treat S as a subset of G0 since then tx |S : S → tx (S) is a homeomorphism (since tx |S is a continuous
bijection with compact domain). If tx (S) is a neighbourhood of tx (y) in G0 then we are done (by taking
the preimage through tx of a neighbourhood of tx (y) homeomorphic to an open ball contained in tx (S)).
Let us consider the set tx (S) ∩ U for some neighbourhood U of tx (y) homeomorphic to an open ball (this
set is now homeomorphic to a subset of Rdim(G0 ) ). Using the commutativity of the diagram above it is
apparent that

                                  tx |t−1
                                       x (tx (S)∩U )
                                                     : t−1
                                                        x (tx (S) ∩ U ) → tx (S) ∩ U

is locally trivial (i.e., (t−1
                            x (tx (S) ∩ U ), tx (S) ∩ U, Gx , tx |t−1
                                                          x
                                                                   x (tx (S)∩U )
                                                                                 ) is a principle bundle). Hence, for any
neighbourhood V of the identity in Gx we have that (tx (S) ∩ U ) × V is homeomorphic to an open subset
                                            x

in Gx and hence a manifold of the same dimension as Gx . Now by using Theorem 3.2 we get tx (S) ∩ U
is open in U and conclude that tx (S) is indeed a neighbourhood of tx (y).

    From this and Theorem 1.1 it is visible that the assumption that tx is a quotient map is superfluous
in Theorem 1.2 and we get the desired result:
Theorem 3.6. Let G be a transitive topological groupoid with a smooth base G0 for which the space G1
is first-countable and the spaces Gxx , Gx are topological manifolds. Then G is continuously isomorphic to
a unique Lie groupoid through a base preserving isomorphism.
Remark 3.7. In particular the previous theorem holds if G1 is a topological manifold.
Remark 3.8. We wish to note that if the Hilbert–Smith conjecture (cf. [12]) proves valid then the
assumption on Gxx is unnecessary. However, using this method we see no way of weakening any more
assumptions in order to get a result similar to Theorem 1.1.


References
[1] Bing R.H., The cartesian product of a certain non-manifold and a line is E4 , Bull. Amer. Math.
    Soc. 64 (1958), 82–84.

[2] Brown R., Hardy J.P.L., Topological groupoids. I. Universal constructions, Math. Nachr. 71 (1976),
    273–286.

[3] Engelking R., Dimension theory, North-Holland Mathematical Library, Vol. 19, North-Holland Pub-
    lishing Co., Amsterdam – Oxford – New York, PWN – Polish Scientific Publishers, Warsaw, 1978.

[4] Gleason A.M., Groups without small subgroups, Ann. of Math. 56 (1952), 193–212.

[5] Mackenzie K.C.H., Lie groupoids and Lie algebroids in differential geometry, London Mathematical
    Society Lecture Note Series, Vol. 124, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1987.

[6] Mackenzie K.C.H., General theory of Lie groupoids and Lie algebroids, London Mathematical Society
    Lecture Note Series, Vol. 213, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2005.

[7] Montgomery D., Zippin L., Small subgroups of finite-dimensional groups, Ann. of Math. 56 (1952),
    213–241.

[8] Palais R.S., On the existence of slices for actions of non-compact Lie groups, Ann. of Math. 73
    (1961), 295–323.

[9] Pasike E.E., Petunin Yu.I., Savkin V.I., Continuous bijective mappings in topological and Banach
    manifolds, J. Math. Sci. 58 (1992), 286–29.

[10] Raźny P., On the generalization of Hilbert’s fifth problem to transitive groupoids, SIGMA 13 (2017),
     098, 10 pages, arXiv:1710.11440.

                                                           8
[11] Renault J., A groupoid approach to C ∗ -algebras, Lecture Notes in Math., Vol. 793, Springer, Berlin,
     1980.

[12] Tao T., Hilbert’s fifth problem and related topics, Graduate Studies in Mathematics, Vol. 153, Amer.
     Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2014.




                                                    9
